# 1. Program Installation on Linux

> Jiacheng Eric Chuan @ CFIA  
> jiacheng.chuan@canada.ca

## Ways to install a software

1. Some Linux distributions have software managers (or software stores), such as Ubuntu Software Center. Those software managers have Graphic User Interface (GUI), so the usage is straightforward, just like installing app in Google Store. 
2. Many Linux distributions also provide package management tools (Character User Interface). In this tutorial, we take APT for example.
3. Install from source.
4. Some software can run without installation.

### 1. Install via software managers

You can try it yourself.

### 2. Package management tools

Debian and Ubuntu uses **APT** as the default package management tools. If you are an OSX user, you can use [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/).

**APT** is a commandline package manager and provides commands for
searching and managing as well as querying information about packages.

```
Usage: apt [options] command

Most used commands:
  list - list packages based on package names
  search - search in package descriptions
  show - show package details
  install - install packages
  remove - remove packages
  autoremove - Remove automatically all unused packages
  update - update list of available packages
  upgrade - upgrade the system by installing/upgrading packages
  full-upgrade - upgrade the system by removing/installing/upgrading packages
  edit-sources - edit the source information file
```

#### Update local package list

**Repositories** contain installable packages. APT keeps a local database with a list of all available packages and where to find them. This database needs to be explicitly updated. To update the APT database:

```bash
apt update
```

##### Root permission

In most cases, you need **ROOT permission** to change system files. You may get the following error message after running `apt update`:

```
Reading package lists... Done
E: Could not open lock file /var/lib/apt/lists/lock - open (13: Permission denied)
E: Unable to lock directory /var/lib/apt/lists/
W: Problem unlinking the file /var/cache/apt/pkgcache.bin - RemoveCaches (13: Permission denied)
W: Problem unlinking the file /var/cache/apt/srcpkgcache.bin - RemoveCaches (13: Permission denied)
```

This means APT cannot modify system files because of permission.

To solve it, we need grant <u>top-level permission</u> to `apt update`. An easy way to do so is to prepend `sudo` before your code:

```sh
sudo apt update
```

> `sudo` is a program for Unix-like computer operating systems that allows users to run programs with the security privileges of another user, by default the superuser. It originally stood for "superuser do" as the older versions of sudo were designed to run commands only as the superuser. However, the later versions added support for running commands not only as the superuser but also as other users, and thus it is also commonly expanded as "substitute user do".

After you enter the password of super-user, you will receive messages like:

```
Hit:1 http://security.ubuntu.com/ubuntu bionic-security InRelease
Hit:2 http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu bionic InRelease
Hit:....
Reading package lists... Done
Building dependency tree       
Reading state information... Done
All packages are up to date.
```

This means your package lists are updated.

#### Upgrade packages

`apt update` only update the package lists, not packages. To update the packages in your system, you can use

```sh
sudo apt upgrade
```

If you have upgradable packages, you will be asked to enter `y` to allow upgradation. You can also enter `n` to reject the installation.

#### Search and install packages

If you are not sure if a package is in the package list, you can search it:

```bash
apt search <PACKAGE_NAME>
```

For example, to search `fastqc`, a quality control software for high throughput sequence data:

```sh
apt search fastqc
```

You may get the following results:

```
Sorting... Done
Full Text Search... Done
fastqc/bionic 0.11.5+dfsg-6 all
  quality control for high throughput sequence data

qcumber/bionic 1.0.14+dfsg-1 all
  quality control of genomic sequences
```

It indicates `fastqc` is in your program list, you can install via:

```sh
sudo apt install fastqc
```

You shall provide the password of `sudo`, and then type `Y` to answer the question: `Do you want to continue? [Y/n]`.

After the installation, you can type `fastqc --version` to see if it is installed.

> Try to install `wget`, `tree` and `htop`. Run them after installation.
>
> Also, check whether `nano` and `vim` are installed or not.

#### Remove packages

To remove packages, use

```sh
sudo apt remove <PACKAGE_NAME>...
```

#### A complex example

Sometimes you cannot find the package you want in the apt package lists, such as the latest [R](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/linux/ubuntu/).

R is hosted on its own ubuntu repository. We need to add the repository to the `/etc/apt/sources.list` file.

Open the file in the `nano` text editor with `sudo`:

```
sudo nano /etc/apt/sources.list
```

Move your cursor to <u>the bottom of the file</u> with down arrow.

Then, paste `deb https://cloud.r-project.org/bin/linux/ubuntu bionic-cran35/` to the last line; then press enter to enter a new line.

Exit the editor by

1. CTRL + X to exit;
2. Save the modified file by typing Y;
3. Press ENTER.

Then, update apt package lists:

```sh
sudo apt-get update
```

If you get an error below: 

```
Err:3 https://cloud.r-project.org/bin/linux/ubuntu bionic-cran35/ InRelease
  The following signatures couldn't be verified because the public key is not available: NO_PUBKEY 51716619E084DAB9
Reading package lists... Done
W: GPG error: https://cloud.r-project.org/bin/linux/ubuntu bionic-cran35/ InRelease: The following signatures couldn't be verified 
because the public key is not available: NO_PUBKEY 51716619E084DAB9
E: The repository 'https://cloud.r-project.org/bin/linux/ubuntu bionic-cran35/ InRelease' is not signed.
```

It means you used a secure APT and the R repository is not trusted by your system. Then, you need to add the public key of the R repository:

```sh
sudo apt-key adv --keyserver keyserver.ubuntu.com --recv-keys E298A3A825C0D65DFD57CBB651716619E084DAB9
```

Run `sudo apt-get update` again. If no error, you are good to go. Otherwise, follow the instructions under <u>Secure APT</u> in https://cran.r-project.org/bin/linux/ubuntu/.

Then, search `r-base`:

```sh\
sudo apt search "^r-base"
```

> `"` quotes the string with special characters.
>
> `^` narrows the search results by matching packages started with `r-base`.

The output should be

```
Sorting... Done
Full Text Search... Done
r-base/bionic-cran35 3.6.1-1bionic all
  GNU R statistical computation and graphics system

r-base-core/bionic-cran35 3.6.1-1bionic amd64
  GNU R core of statistical computation and graphics system

r-base-core-dbg/bionic-cran35 3.6.1-1bionic amd64
  GNU R debug symbols for statistical comp. language and environment

r-base-dev/bionic-cran35 3.6.1-1bionic all
  GNU R installation of auxiliary GNU R packages

r-base-html/bionic-cran35 3.6.1-1bionic all
  GNU R html docs for statistical computing system functions
```

So, the version of `r-base` is 3.6.1. It is just the latest R we want.

Install the latest R:

```sh
sudo apt install r-base
```

### 3. Other package management tools

Other package management tools are similar to APT.

For example, try to install `multiqc`, which aggregates results from bioinformatics analyses across many samples into a single report.

You can see the installation methods in [its documents](https://multiqc.info/docs/#installing-multiqc).

#### Anaconda

We can install `multiqc` with [anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/), a free and open-source distribution of the Python programming languages for scientific computing, that aims to simplify package management and deployment.

```sh
# download anaconda installation script:
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-2019.03-Linux-x86_64.sh

# run the installation:
sh Anaconda3-2019.03-Linux-x86_64.sh
# you need to following the installation instrunctions to install it.

# after installation, enter a new BASH shell to load the anaconda environment.
bash

# now you can see (base) prepended to your prompt. It means your are in the base environment of Anaconda.

# install multiqc with Anaconda:
conda install -c bioconda multiqc
```

#### PIP

PIP is another python package manager. If you do not use Anaconda, you can install PIP with

```sh
sudo apt install python python3 pip pip3
```

Then, install `multiqc` with

```sh
sudo pip install multiqc
```

### 4. Install from source

> Reference:
>
> https://www.thegeekstuff.com/2012/06/install-from-source/
>
> http://www.codecoffee.com/tipsforlinux/articles/27.html

Take `samtools` for an example. `samtools` is a tool collections (written in C) for manipulating next-generation sequencing data (http://htslib.org/).

#### Read the installation guide

Open [this link](https://www.htslib.org/download/) for installation guide of `samtools`.

#### Download the source files

```sh
# create a directory for downloaded files
mkdir -p ~/Downloads

# change to the directory
cd ~/Downloads

# download samtools source release
wget https://github.com/samtools/samtools/releases/download/1.9/samtools-1.9.tar.bz2
```

> **Caution:** In Bash Script, strings after `#` is regarded as comments and will not be executed normally.

#### Decompress source files

Usually, we need to decompress the source files.

The table shows common compression types and decompression methods.

| Compression Type      | Decompression Method             |
| --------------------- | -------------------------------- |
| `.gz`                 | `gzip -d archive.gz`             |
| `.zip`                | `unzip archive.zip`              |
| `.xz`                 | `xz -d archive.xz`               |
| `.Z`                  | `zcat archive.Z > archive_files` |
| `.bz2`                | `bzip2 -d archive.bz2`           |
| `.tar`                | `tar -xf archive.tar`            |
| `.tar.gz` or `.tgz`   | `tar -zxf archive.tar.gz`        |
| `.tar.bz2` or `.tbz2` | `tar -jxf archive.tar.bz2`       |
| `.tar.xz`             | `tar -Jxf archive.tar.xz`        |

The extension of `samtools` source archive is `.tar.bz2`, so we use `tar -jxf <FILE.tar.bz2>` to extract the file:

```sh
tar -jxf samtools-1.9.tar.bz2
```

#### Configure

Go to the directory, and then run the configure script.

```sh
cd samtools-1.9
./configure
```

The above command makes the shell run the script named ' *configure* ' which exists in the current directory. This script <u>checks for lots of dependencies on your system</u>. For the particular software to work properly, it may be requiring a lot of things to be existing on your machine already.

When you run the configure script you would see a lot of output on the screen , each being some sort of question and a respective yes/no as the reply. If any of the <u>major requirements are missing</u> on your system, the <u>configure script would exit</u> and you cannot proceed with the installation, until you **get those required things**.

Samtools requires `gcc` to compile the source code of C language. If it is not installed, you can install via `sudo apt install gcc`.

If you get no errors and the configure script runs successfully (if there is any error the last few lines of the output would glaringly be stating the error) then you can proceed with the next command `make`.

#### Compilation

```sh
make
```

> If `make` is not installed on your computer, you can run `sudo apt install make` first.

' *make* ' is actually a utility which exists on almost all Unix systems. `make` would use the directions generated by `./configure` and <u>proceed with the compilation and installation</u>.

#### Installation

Actually, the binary (executable) `samtools` is already installed in your current working directory. You can use `./samtools` to run Samtools.

However, if you want to invoke `samtools` from **anywhere** in the system, you need use the following command to <u>install these binaries in the standard paths</u>.

##### Method 1: `make install`

```sh
sudo make install
```

> Note that some times installing the software may require root privileges, so one may gain the rights and then proceed with the above command.

##### Method 2: add binaries in the standard paths

**PATH** is an environmental variable in **Linux** and other Unix-like operating systems that tells the shell which directories to search for executable files in response to commands issued by a user.

To view the current value of your PATH environment variable, you can use the [**echo**](https://www.computerhope.com/jargon/e/echo.htm) command. As with all variables in the [shell](https://www.computerhope.com/jargon/s/shell.htm), when referring to the value you need to put a dollar sign before the variable name:

```sh
echo $PATH
```

The current value of path returns to the [command prompt](https://www.computerhope.com/jargon/c/commprom.htm), like:

```sh
/usr/bin:/home/cj/anaconda3/bin:/usr/local/sbin
```

> `PATH` is delimited with `:`.
>
> The `PATH`s are `/usr/bin`, `/home/cj/anaconda3/bin` and `/usr/local/sbin`.

If you want to invoke `samtools` from anywhere in the system, you can

1. Create a symbolic link of `samtools` in one of your `PATH`.

   ```sh
   sudo ln -s `pwd`/samtools /usr/bin/samtools
   ```

   > `ln -s <TARGET> <LINK_NAME>` creates a symbolic link to TARGET with the name LINK_NAME.
   >
   > ``` `pwd` ``` (`pwd` command in **backtick**): **A backtick is not a quotation sign.** It has a very special meaning. Everything you type between backticks is evaluated (executed) by the shell before the main command (like `ln` in the example), and the *output* of that execution is used by that command, just as if you'd type that output at that place in the command line. 

2. **OR** prepend the path containing `samtools` executable to `PATH`.

   See https://www.computerhope.com/issues/ch001647.htm for full documentation.

   Here, I append a new line `export PATH=~/Downloads/samtools-1.9:$PATH` to the `~/.profile` file with the following command. You can use `nano` to modify the file:

   ```sh
   nano ~/.profile
   ```

   > For every new shell session, `~/.profile` will be executed. (Different users have different home directories, so changing the file only affects the current user. If you want to change `PATH` of all users, modify `/etc/profile` with `sudo`.
   >
   > `export` passes the PATH environment variable to any child processes.

## Have a try with installed software

After install `fastqc` and `multiqc`, have a try to use them.

Download the sequence file [sample.fastq.gz](../lab/1.ProgramInstallation/sample.fastq.gz).

```sh
wget https://github.com/cihga39871/LinuxTraining/raw/master/lab/1.ProgramInstallation/sample.fastq.gz
```

Analyze the quality of the sequence file:

```sh
fastqc sample.fastq.gz
```

The output files are `sample_fastqc.html` and `sample_fastqc.zip`. You can view the quality control report in the html file.

Then, get a pretty version of quality control report:

```sh
multiqc .
```

The new quality control report is `multiqc_report.html`.

Congratulations! You successfully run your first Bioinformatics analysis!
